---
layout: linear
date: 27 February 2022
title: Reflection on Signatures
preamble: |-
    \newcommand{\gen}{\mathtt{generate}}
    \newcommand{\sgn}{\mathtt{sign}}
    \newcommand{\vrf}{\mathtt{verify}}
returnPage: ./
---

For thousands of years, signatures and more broadly stamps and seals had been used in literally every society to bind a person with an entity. Even in the Stone Age, before the emergence of written languages, human carved symbolic shapes to signify their unique cultural identity. Signatures, nowadays in more refined forms, are still widely deployed in modern societies. Though in some cases, they could also fail to fulfil their intended goal.

Then one may ask: what is the machinery in their effectiveness and sometimes ineffectiveness? How would one design and implement a more effective signature? These lead us to a quest for the *nature* of signatures.

Back to the primitive tribes in prehistoric times, signatures on an appliance conceivably served to display possession of superior power or culture. The tradition continues all the way to modern days, for example when an artist signs her painting to proudly claim the ownership of the aesthetic value she created, or when a food company brands trademark on its product to associate the taste with the enterprise itself. Conversely, a craftsman would be unmotivated to sign a clumsy experimental work due to lack of merit. We could thus put it this way:

> Via signature, a signer can actively tie himself to the inherent quality of an entity.

Hence signatures are meant to be exclusive from a signer's perpective. He intends to establish via signature a permanent, immutable bond to certain quality. And the foremost demand is *unforgeability*, namely no one else could change his signature on the signed entity (thus jeopardising the bond), or copy his signature onto a new entity (thus announcing fake bond and potentially harming his fame).

Now we could observe some accidental and dramatic effects from the persepective of other parties. Signatures (which are assumed unforgeable) allow a third party to quickly connect a person with a quality -- may it be good or bad. In other words, a signature witnesses an *undeniable* announcement made by the signer.

This way of thinking in turn feeds back and reshapes how signatures could be used. A person could now *request* others to sign a given entity in order to create a desired undeniable bond. He may later show this piece on court to end disputes. In this setting, the person who signs does not actively sign for merit, but rather passively signs for reassurance to the requester.

> Via signature, a signer passively ties himself to the quality set by a requester.

Such twofold, bidirectional functions rendered (unforgeable) signatures communally desirable. The crux is, then, the enforcement of unforgeability. Rephrased: by what machinery could one accept a real signature but reject a forgery?

Imagine the signer and forger were two clones of the same person, then the real signature and the forgery would be indistinguishable. Luckily the case is not happening. In reality, two persons always have different abilities, habits, characters, and so on. Then the signer must incorporate his distinctive hidden feature, or asymmetry, into his signature to realise unforgeability. Signing is an occasion where the signer reveals his secret, so to speak.

But there is problem still. Asymmetry does tell the two apart, but we have no clue about who is who. As a conventional and sociological solution, the one who declares first is the real owner. 

The final necessity is the inseparable marriage of the signature and the signed entity. Any attempt of removing the signature from the entity would at least damage their completeness; transferring the signature as is to another entity would never fit. With this addendum we reach a more comprehensive claim:

> Signing (with unforgeability as its aim) is a procedure where the signer instantiates his secret on an entity. By instantiation, the secret does not appear in its pure form but rather tangles with the entity.

Various signature schemes were successfully employed in history to meet the requirement as much as possible. For instance,

- A classical signature instantiates one's handwriting on paper document. The patterns of his hand motion, ink selection, and pressing on the nib are all encoded in and tangled with the fibre of paper, both structurally and visually.
- A seal in ancient China reveals the physical characteristics of the seal itself on a document. Secrets including the material, surface flatness, cracks and the carving of the characters, are incorporated into the paper as in handwritten signatures. All these dimensions indirectly reflect the identity of the owner.

These approaches largely fulfil the requirement, but perfect unforgeability is merely a dream. After sufficient exposures, the "secret" could be learnt and imitated by experts, hence compromising the signatures. Apparently he the signer is facing a dilemma: On the one hand he must reveal his secret to distinguish himself from a potential forger; on the other hand a revealed secret can be learnt by others, thus turning him and the forger symmetric again. His only advantage is that *he is leading in time*. If it takes the forger more than a lifetime to learn and duplicate, then the signer wins. In this sense, signature is an art of controlling the exposure of secret. This notion, as is summarised neatly below, is one of the revolutionary ideas of modern cryptography.

> Forgery is always possible, but if it takes unreasonably many resources to complete, then the signature is *practically unforgeable*, or *secure*.

The advent of digital age has forced a transformation of signatures from an art to an engineering practice and even exact science. The very challenge inherent in digital documents is that every bit can be efficiently inspected and manipulated. They are extremely condensed representations that rip off any physical redundancy one may find in traditional paper documents. Perfect cloning becomes a trivial job. Trimming is as easy. Signature seems impossible.

If there is any hope, it must be done in the following way which might end up in disbelief:

> The signer incorporates his secret (which is now digitized) in a digital document. Since there is no physical support of any kind, the incorporation must be content-based. Hence third parties have full access to every details of the particular signature. Its content contains sufficient information to identify the signer, yet they still could not reproduce the instantiation of the secret on other documents!

