---
layout: page
date: 13 January 2022
title: The Farkas' Lemma
preamble: |-
    \newcommand{\conv}{\operatorname{conv}}
    \newcommand{\cone}{\operatorname{cone}}
    \renewcommand{\vec}[1]{\mathbf{#1}}
---

This short exposition is about the Farkas' lemma, a byproduct of the Fourier-Motzkin elimination. Under the same title multiple variants exist, but all of them have a "binary choice" nature. The lemma plays a key role in the theory of linear programming amongst many others.

**Farkas' lemma I.**
For a linear system of inequalities $$A \vec{x} \leq \vec{b}$$, exactly one of the two choices is true:

- either the system is feasible;
- or there exists a "witness of infeasibility" $$\vec{h} \geq \vec{0}$$ with $$\vec{h}^\T A = \vec{0}^\T$$ but $$\vec{h}^\T \vec{b} = -1$$.

The mysterious formulas just mean the following: "We can derive the contradicting inequality $$0 \leq -1$$ by appropriate, non-negative weighted sum of the original inequalities (rows)." So at its core, the lemma states a logically stimulating fact: Solving linear system of inequalities via the operation of "non-negative weighted sum" is not only *sound* but also *complete*.

*Proof of Farkas' lemma I.*
Firstly, the choices cannot be simultaneously true; otherwise we come to the absurdity

$$ 0 = (\vec{h}^\T A) \vec{x} = \vec{h}^\T (A \vec{x}) \leq \vec{h}^\T \vec{b} = -1. $$

Next assume that the first choice is false (i.e. the system is infeasible) and show that the second choice must be true. This basically comes for free from Fourier-Motzkin elimination. Recall that during elimination of $$x_k$$ we group the inequalities into three blocks, depending on the coefficient of $$x_k$$ being 1, -1 or 0 (no loss of generality up to positive scaling). The "1" and "-1" blocks give rise to upper and lower bounds on $$x_k$$, respectively. Then we generate all inequalities of the form "lower ≤ upper" and copy the "0" block. After some thoughts you realise that the procedure is just (inductively) adding non-negative weighted rows of the initial system. Eventually we eliminated all variables, left with a list of comparisons on real numbers. This final system is infeasible since the initial system is infeasible. But then, with proper positive scaling, we must spot a $$0 \leq -1$$ in our list. To put it differently, we can generate $$0 \leq -1$$ via non-negative weighted sum of the initial system. ∎

Next we provide another variant of Farkas' lemma.

**Farkas' lemma II.**
For a linear system of inequalities $$A \vec{x} = \vec{b}, ~\vec{x} \geq \vec{0}^\T$$, exactly one of the choices occurs:

- either it is feasible;
- or there exists a witness $$\vec{h}: ~\vec{h}^\T A \geq \vec{0}$$ but $$\vec{h}^\T \vec{b} < 0$$.

This version has a very nice geometric restatement: Given $$A = \set{ \vec{a}_1, \dots, \vec{a}_n }$$ and a vector $$\vec{b}$$,

- either $$\vec{b} \in \cone(A)$$;
- or there exists a hyperplane $$H: \vec{h}^\T \vec{x} = 0$$ such that $$\cone(A) \subseteq H^+$$ and $$\vec{b} \in H^-$$.

As you might have noticed, it is a special type of separation theorem for convex sets (with slightly different conditions because neither a cone nor a hyperplane is compact).

*Proof of Farkas' lemma II.*
Note that

$$\begin{align*}
	A \vec{x} = \vec{b}, ~\vec{x} \geq \vec{0}
	&\iff \begin{pmatrix} A \\ -A \\ -I \end{pmatrix} \vec{x} \leq \begin{pmatrix} \vec{b} \\ -\vec{b} \\ \vec{0} \end{pmatrix},
\end{align*}$$

so by Farkas' lemma I we see

$$\begin{align*}
	\text{feasible}
	&\iff \exists (\vec{u}, \vec{v}, \vec{w}) \geq \vec{0}: ~(\vec{u}^\T - \vec{v}^\T) A = \vec{w}^\T, ~(\vec{u}^\T - \vec{v}^\T) \vec{b} = -1 \\
	&\iff \exists \vec{h}: ~\vec{h}^\T A \geq \vec{0}, ~\vec{h}^\T \vec{b} = -1
\end{align*}$$

as desired. ∎
